The world is Big Data, and The Cloud is its landlord. It is our responsibility to ferret it out of its primitive unknown, mine it, harvest it, dump it by the tanker-truckful into great Data Lakes overhung with a gradient of computational Fog stretching to the Clouds, and refine the Actionable Insights from its desiccated husk. The Cloud promises us an infinite, seamless expanse of Knowledge. If only we can harness the wily spray of our Organic Content, filtering our every action, affection, and affiliation through a thicket of algorithmically optimized platforms, letting their omniscience creep into our bodies with biosensor wearables, then The Cloud might teach us enough about ourselves to be able to lead a fulfilled and healthy life. Information by its many names is the central quilting point for contemporary capitalism (eg. see {% cite warkCapitalDeadThis2021 %}), and like prior assemblages of capital is thick with contradiction. It is historically contingent and inevitable, material and transcendent, a concrete set of technologies and techniques as well as a web of belief systems, power, and dreams. The Cloud now dreams of a great Knowledge Graph of Everything, to Dissolve the Silos that keep the Bigness of the Data from teaching us all we need to know. It tells us this is important for the fate of humanity. 

The Knowledge Graph of Everything and all that it promises is a mirage, though. Its history is that of "[primitive accumulation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Primitive_accumulation_of_capital)" of informational capital, the widening of informational asymmetries, and the logical conclusion of a model of digital serfdom where we are promised glimpses of unimaginable computational power through the pinhole lens of platforms for rent. With the enclosure of the web nearly total, and our attendant ability to imagine it in any form aside from The Cloud nearly eclipsed, information conglomerates now position themselves as information "Infrastructure" rather than mere Platforms {% cite barnsWhenWebBecame2020 plantinInfrastructureStudiesMeet2018 %}. The politics, property and power relationships of the contemporary web recede into the background of always-on elastic computational resources. Public resources are rallied to build seemingly public data infrastructures to support far-flung facets of public life atop systems built for decidedly private profit. Aside from the properly pathological nature of the Knowledge Graph of Everything as a colonial vision of all data given its Correct place as structured by universalizing ontologies, it *is impossible* and *won't work.* Instead, by uncritically adopting the logic of The Cloud, governments and academics will be led along by the nose just long enough to build critical mass for an interlocking set of platforms that ratchet us ever further into the captivity of surveillance.

Approaching the information-surveillance-platform archipelago through knowledge graphs gives us an underexplored lens to alternative, properly *human* data infrastructures. Their [history](#knowledge-graphs-a-backbone-in-the-surveillance-economy), the development from the liberatory ambitions of the [Semantic Web](#semantic-web-priesthoods) and [Linked Data](#linked-data-platforms) projects into the [panoptical](#knowledge-graphs-panoptica) data systems of the surveillance economy, is rich with 'paths not taken' from which we can reimagine a future. Two contemporary projects from the National Institutes of Health ([NIH](#nih-the-biomedical-translator)) and National Science Foundation ([NSF](#nsf-open-knowledge-network)) illustrate the ways our ambitions for public data infrastructures are steered by the constraints of the cloud and the imminent capacity for harm that poses. The properly [ideological foundation of The Cloud](#the-cloud-orthodoxy) meets knowledge graphs along with the parallel strains of "AI" and large language model (LLM) to show their true intention as an [extension of surveillance capitalism and a re-entrenchment of informational dominance](#the-near-future-of-surveillance-capitalism-knowledge-graphs-get-chatbots).

The past, present, and future of knowledge graphs give us the pieces to articulate a properly *human* data infrastructure as [**vulgar linked data**](#vulgar-linked-data). Predicated on relationality, heterogeneity, distribution of power, and vernacular expression, vulgar linked data infrastructures attempt to empower *people* to *socially organize* information in a truly decentralized sociotechnological commons, rather than empowering *systems* to *rent* knowledge organization for *profit.*