
---


While it is still too early to evaluate the OKN as a project, it along with the Translator show the outlines of public information infrastructures to come. 

The two major public research funding agencies in the US have both devised novel funding mechanisms to be able to bypass typical review and include private industry in their data infrastructure projects {% cite nationalsciencefoundationNSFConvergenceAccelerator2019 consortiumBiomedicalDataTranslator2019 %}. These data infrastructures consist of a number of sub-projects for building new domain-specific and universalizing Semantic Web ontologies and cloud-based platforms for data storage and retrieval. Both are both explicitly oriented towards exposing structured data to "AI" and other derivative "big data" applications, rather than towards integrating in the daily work of researchers or the public at large. The potential for harm from big data solutionism, corporate capture, and discretionary abuse is common to both projects. These and other[^EOSC] efforts like NIH's STRIDES initiative point towards a cloud-driven SaaS/PaaS future for public data infrastructure {% cite nationalinstitutesofhealthSTRIDESInitiative2021 %}.

The Translator and OKN and their sub-projects have many possible fates: their grant funding could peter out and they could amount to very little beyond the scattered prototypes and spinoff startups that they've currently produced. They could flourish and become exactly what their creators intend them to be - the seamless data infrastructures of the future that manage to miraculously avoid all potential harms.

More important than the outcomes of these projects in particular is how the ruts of collective imagination drive both projects towards very similar designs with very similar flaws. It is not the technologies *in themselves* that are pathological, but the way they are imagined as part of a larger socio-political system: who is intended to use them, to have power within them, to own them? These projects presuppose an enlightened technocrat class as the principle agent of social good and configure technologies accordingly. The grand unified graph of everything will allow the truth to emerge from the Big Data so that decisionmakers can divine what is best for the commoners who could not possibly understand the complexities of their health, environment, or social systems themselves. This belief finds fertile ground among academics who intend to do good but have little incentive to critically evaluate the surrounding political-economic systems that might structure the form that good might take[^utopiaofrules].

Maybe paradoxically, the aspirations of universality strongly constrain their ambition and use. By punting the more foundational questions of creating storage and compute infrastructure to the cloud, there is no place for "raw" data since it is too unwieldy to affordably host or handle. By recapitulating the focus of the early semantic web on universalizing ontologies rather than tooling for arbitrary expression, the projects hem themselves in to only what its creators can imagine either in the ontologies themselves or the ways their expansion are governed. By needing to present themselves as singularly "true" and reliable, they are less able to represent ambiguity and uncertainty --- which are ultimately "truer" representations of most kinds of Knowledge. By adopting the patterns of the industries that enclose us within similarly limited platforms, they are doomed to re-entrench rather than liberate us from the engineered helplessness that makes it hard to fluidly express and make use of information in the first place.

These design logics and the technologies they produce must be understood against the backdrop of the history and present structure of the platformatized cloud-driven information economy writ large. Facing the limits of proprietary ontologies in private knowledge graphs, the information industry wants a set of cross-domain "top level" ontologies to enable the smooth interchange of public information that can then be integrated with "lower-level" private ontologies for an even greater array of surveillance-backed knowledge-as-a-service platforms. Under the guiding star of openness as an end in itself, researchers and funding agencies seem keen to provide it, and in partnership with private industry have adopted the logic of their platforms.
