## The Cloud Orthodoxy

Ideology evades any singular definition, and I'm not obnoxious enough to claim I have a Complete and True Perspective[^nonuniversal] on something as multifarious as the belief system underlying The Cloud as an infrastructural pattern. 

To set the Terms and Conditions of this section: this definition is a necessary strawman to make sense of patterns of outcomes and pose as contrast to our alternative. I describe the Cloud Orthodoxy as a belief *system* because none of its components are unique or necessary for any one person to believe, but they are mutually reinforcing and self-compatible. It is one of many ideologies active in this cluttered space, including immortality cults like longtermism and good old fashioned neoliberalism. Many of these beliefs are not "bad" in themselves --- assuming that the adherents of an ideology don't believe they are "bad" people is a foundational part of trying to understand them. By describing it as a positive vision, I am omitting the brutal reality of surveillance, control, and profit extraction that it generates. These ideas of course draw on a mountain of prior thought[^priorthought], and I admit my relative inexperience, welcome critique and contextualization, and will certainly need to completely rewrite them in future work.

My argument here is that the people and companies involved with these technologies don't have an "ethical deficit" that might call for "more ethics in AI," but that The Cloud poses its own strong ethical doctrine.

The Terms and Conditions having been settled...

---


A cardinal value of Cloud Orthodoxy is **convenience.** The internet should be *fast,* *reliable,* and everything[^IP] should be available on demand. Convenience is elevated at the exclusion of other values when in conflict like shared power or flexibility. **Complexity is a cognitive nuisance** for people with otherwise busy full lives, so it should be hidden as much as possible. **Interface design** is a major point of competition between platforms because it is a primary method of obscuring complexity.

The world is **asymmetrical and hierarchical.** I am a consumer, a *user* and I trade my power to a *developer* or platform owner in exchange for convenience. The purpose of the internet is for platform holders to **provide services** to users. As a user I have a right to *speak with the manager,* but do not have a right to decide which services are provided or how. As a platform owner I have a right to demand whatever the users will give me in exchange for my services. Services are *rented* or given away freely[^timestealing] rather than *sold* because to the user the product is *convenience* rather than *software.* **Powerlessness is a feature:** users don't need to learn anything, and platform owners can freely experiment on users to optimize their experience without their knowledge. **Information is asymmetrical** in multiple ways: platforms collect and hold more information than the users can have and parcel it back out as services. But also, platform holders are the only ones who know *how* to create their services, and so they are responsible for the convenience prescribed for a platform but not the convenience of users understanding how to make the platform themselves.

**The Platform has agency.** Computational "agents" or microservices are dispatched by the platform, not by you. The Platform provides a fixed set of features with a fixed set of affordances. The **Platform harnesses Users[^harnesses]** and creates possibilities --- without the Platform they have nothing, The Platform provides everything. **Users make Content** for the Platform either explicitly or implicitly eg. via crowdsourced labor like training spam filters, reporting bots, reinforcing network effects by usage, and so on, which increases its value for other users. **Users are fundamentally interchangeable** and isolated from one another. The existence of sociality or community is a service provided by the Platform. **The Platform Personalizes:** Users are *interchangeable* but not *homogenous,* and The Platform uses their Content to create a private reality for each User. **Users are unreliable** --- they lie, cheat, and subvert the game established by the Platform, so **only the Platform can ensure safety and reliability.**

**Information is a commodity.** The commodity form of Information is Data. Information is a natural resource to be mined. Information is something that users consume. **Ambiguity is a bug** - information is **true or false,** and there is a single True way of describing the world regardless of context or positionality[^googleranking]. Data that does not conform to the correct schema is *unclean.* The highest goal of all data is to be **machine readable.** Provenance is a matter of estimating degree of certainty about Truth, not situating information in its context. **More data is better[^bigdickdata].** Uncertainty is a deviation from some underlying True value and can be fixed by having more or higher *quality* data {% cite halevyUnreasonableEffectivenessData2009 %}. Where users make content, **the Platform reveals insights** from a large enough dataset by applying the right algorithmic computation or reasoning agent --- the platform refines data into Knowledge[^spokeknowledge]. **The Platform knows better** than individual, atomized users because it has more data than them, and so the Platform should collect as much of their data as possible to provide them the best service. It is impossible or inconvenient for users to make use of all the world's data, so the role of the Platform is to provide Knowledge as a service by algorithmically sorting feeds, providing summaries, and so on. **Privacy is at the discretion of the Platform,** since data is needed to make derivative services that ultimately benefit the user. If the user doesn't like this arrangement, they are free to not use the Platform. The benefit of the platform doesn't necessarily need to be for the particular user who is providing data or content --- **The Platform matches different kinds of users** like advertisers to customers, law enforcement agencies to suspects, etc. in order to maximize the overall value of all Platforms.